SSL/TLS ecosysystem involves three key players -:
Client
Server
Certificate Authority (CA)

Key Communication :-
Client :
 Entity initiating the TLS handshake
 Web Browser
  Phone, Apps, Smart Toaster, IOT
 Optionally authenticated

Server :
 Entity receiving the TLS handshake
 Web Server
  Apache, IIS, Nginx, etc.
  Load balancer or SSL Accelerator
Always authenticated

Certificate Autority :-
 Governing entity that issues certificates
 Trusted by client and server
 Provides trust anchor
 If we trust the CA we trust what the CA trusts.

Mostly 5 org provides/secure 98 of the Internet
IdenTrust, DigiCert, Sectigo, GoDaddy, GlobalSign.


1.Certificate Authority is the cornerstone of the TLS/SSL process
  - CA has a public Key and a private key
  - CA has a self-signed certificate

2. Server wants to acquire a certificate. 
3. Server generates a Public Key and a private key.
4. Server generates a Certificate Signing Request (CSR)
   - CSR contains server's Public Key
   - CSR is signed by server's private Key
   Note : In some cases the CSR process is abstracted away within the CA's web app
5. Server gives signed CSR to Certificate Authority (CA)
6. CA inspects and validates information in CSR
7. CA creates certificate using information from CSR
8. CA signs certificate using CA's private key.
9. CA gives certificate to server
10. Server can then provide certificate to prove its identity.
11. Client wants to connect to the server securely
    - Web browsers already have CA certificate installed
12. Client requests server's certificate
    - Client validates Certificate is legitimate
    - Client validates that server truly owns certificate
13. Client validates server's Certificate in the SSL/TLS handshake
14. SSL/TLS handshake produces session keys:
    - Symmetric encryption
    - Message Authentication code (MAC)
 so these keys uses in creating secure tunnel
15. Session keys from a Secure tunnel to protect communication


Note :- In coperate world most coperation setup their PKI (Internal CA) and uses it to sign their internal resources in their internal network. so the resources in internal network inherit trust from coperation internal PKI




